36 this evening, the book of Genesis. We're back to this
study through the book of Genesis and Genesis chapter 36. We'll look at the
entire chapter
and this is lesson number 77. If you keep track of what lesson number they
are in the book of Genesis, this is lesson number 77
and it's been a long study. Next time we will begin the life of
Joseph
in Genesis chapter 37. I am so thrilled about that
and of course chapter 38, if you're familiar with the book of
Genesis, does not deal with the life of Joseph, Judah and Tamar,
and then in chapter 39 we get back to the life of Joseph.
I mentioned to my children, actually all of them this week, I think to Holly as
well and to even a couple other folks,
that Genesis chapter 36 I think might be the hardest chapter in the book of
Genesis to preach through.
And if you came here this evening to hear me say all the names in Genesis
chapter 36, you are going to be disappointed
because I am not going to read all of Genesis chapter 36.
If you want to record yourself reading all of those names
and listen to it, that would be perfectly fine, but I'm not going to take the time
this evening
nor am I going to struggle through saying all of these names. I have read
it.
I've read it to myself many times and I've tried to pronounce the names as
best as possible,
but I will tell you there's some tongue twisters in there
and not only that, but you start saying all these names that are
just different and you're saying one after the other, after the other, after the
other. It's challenging.
So we'll just look at the first nine verses, but we'll deal with the entirety of the
chapter. I hope that it will be a blessing to you this evening.
I believe that this chapter provides us, obviously,
we know that the chapter provides us with a record of Esau's family tree.
When I think about Esau's family tree, I believe that God gave us this record. You
understand that all scripture is given by inspiration of God.
There's a purpose in every portion of scripture that God has given us.
I know that there are times in which people will jokingly say,
and I believe that they're primarily joking, unfortunately at times I think
there's some measure of seriousness to it,
where people say, well, you know, I really kind of skipped through the book of
Leviticus. Don't.
There's good stuff in the book of Leviticus for us today.
I understand that we're New Testament believers and I'm so thankful
to be a New Testament believer, not under the law, but man, when you understand
what was going on in the book of Leviticus,
it's helpful for us to understand that God preserved it for us for a purpose.
Sometimes people get to the first book of Chronicles and they start looking at
those first several chapters and say, man, I can't even get through that.
I just, I've heard people say this to me many times.
I just skip over the first several chapters of the book of First Chronicles.
Don't. God gave it to us for a purpose, for a reason.
I understand that genealogies can be challenging.
I understand that they're difficult. We can get into a rut.
We're just reading names,
but really ask the spirit of God to teach you and to help you understand.
You can read in some of the other chapters of God's word.
Ezra and Nehemiah provide long list of names of people.
Listen, I'm thankful when you read through Ezra and Nehemiah.
Listen, God made it a point to write down
the names of the people that left Babylon and went back.
Praise God.
And we get to read about them and get to understand some of what took place.
When we look at Genesis 36 and we say, why did God give us this record?
I believe that as we study Genesis chapter 36,
it really enables us to connect some dots.
That's the phraseology that I'll use this evening.
We think about the life of Esau and think
about all that God gives us throughout his word.
This chapter helps us to be able to connect some dots biblically.
In verse number one of Genesis 36,
the Bible says, now these are the generations of Esau who is Edom.
Esau took his wives and the daughters of Canaan, Ada,
the daughter of Elon, the Hittite, and Aholobama, the daughter of Anna,
the daughter of Zibion, the Hittite, and Bashamath, Ishmael's daughter,
the sister of Nebojah, and Ada bared to Esau Eliphaz and Bashamath
bared Rehul and Aholobama bared Jeush and Jalem and Korah.
These are the sons of Esau,
which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
And Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters and all the persons
of his house and his cattle and all his beast and all his substance,
which he had got in the land of Canaan and went into the country
from the face of his brother Jacob.
Verse number seven,
for their riches were more than that they might dwell together in the land
wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
Thus dwelt Esau in Mount Seir.
Esau is Edom.
These are the generations of Esau, the father of the Edomites in Mount Seir.
And so we see in verse number one again in verse number eight,
where the Bible says Esau is Edom, Esau who is Edom.
And we find they dwell in Mount Seir
and that he is the father of the Edomites.
I believe this evening,
even as we get into the passage of Scripture, that it's important
that we remember some important things that took place
previous in the life of Esau and the first one that I want to remind you of.
And really, just by way of introduction,
some reminders before we dive into this passage of Scripture.
I want you to be reminded of the struggle within the womb,
the struggle within the womb.
If you go back to Genesis chapter number twenty five
and we'll just look at a couple of verses, we'll quickly go over these.
But the reality is that some of these messages from Genesis twenty five,
for instance, I preach that message about 18 months ago.
This was a long time ago.
And so when we look at Genesis chapter twenty five,
some of you weren't here 18 months ago.
Some of us have a hard time remembering what happened 18 minutes ago.
And so we look here and we find that the Bible tells us in Genesis chapter twenty
five and verse number twenty one, it says,
And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife because she was barren.
And the Lord was entreated of him.
And Rebecca, his wife, conceived and the children struggled together within her.
And she said, if it be so, why am I thus?
And she went to inquire the Lord.
There was a struggle within the womb and she didn't understand what was going on.
And so she inquired of the Lord.
Notice in verse twenty three, the Bible tells us that the
the Lord said unto her, two nations are in thy womb
and two matter of people shall be separated from thy vows.
And the one people shall be stronger
than the other people and the elder shall serve the younger.
So we are reminded about the struggle
in the womb and we understand that God gave us this truth in Genesis chapter
twenty five with regard to the struggle that's in the womb.
Contextually, it's two nations.
We find that it says that in verse number twenty three, two nations are in thy womb.
We understand those two nations, the two children are Esau and Jacob.
And we understand that Esau becomes the father.
He's he's Edom.
He's the father of the Edomites.
And then, of course, Jacob, the Israelites.
And so we see here in Genesis chapter
twenty five when we're reminded of the struggle in the womb, the two nations.
Contextually, you have the Edomites and the Israelites.
But by application or with symbolism, if you will,
you see not only two nations, but you see two natures.
And I dealt with this when we preached
to this chapter in Genesis twenty five again about 18 months ago.
But when you think about the symbolism
or the application of the two natures, we see the the contextual truth is
that there are two nations we think about the two natures.
You think about the old man and the new man.
And the reality is that if you've been
born again, you have an old man and you have a new man.
You have the old nature and you have the new nature.
And I'm so thankful to be born again.
I'm thankful to have the truth that I've been quickened.
I've been made alive.
But the reality is that we still have that old nature.
The old man still is around the flesh.
And we think about the two natures that are represented here throughout the
struggle in the womb, and we find this old man versus new man,
the flesh versus the spirit.
We find that the Bible says, and it's true even of the nations
contextually, but it's true of the natures by way of application
that the elder shall serve the younger after we are saved.
Listen, our new man is younger than our old man.
You got your old man the day that you were born physically.
The new man is younger than the old man,
but the old man is to serve the younger.
The old man is to be mortified.
The old man is to be crucified.
And so we find that there's the symbolism
that's here in Genesis chapter twenty five and keeping that with our within our
minds as our first reminder, as we get into Genesis chapter thirty six,
we must remember the struggle within the womb.
I would say this.
We must remember that Esau sold his birthright.
And the same chapter in Genesis twenty five,
the end of the chapter records for us how that Esau sold his birthright.
The Bible says in verse number thirty,
picking it up there and Esau in Genesis twenty five.
And Esau said to Jacob, feed me,
I pray thee with that same red pottage for I am faint.
Therefore was his name called Edom.
And Jacob said, sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, behold, I'm at the point to die.
And what profit shall this birthright do to me?
And Jacob said, swear to me this day.
And he swore to him and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils.
And he did eat and drink and rose up and went his way.
Notice the Bible says thus Esau despised his birthright.
The word despised means to hold in low regard.
And you think about this truth where he sold his birthright.
Again, it's something that we need to be
mindful of as we enter into Genesis chapter thirty six.
And then I would say the third thing
that we're reminded of, we see the struggle within the room.
We see the the selling of the birthright.
But we also see the subtlety of Jacob.
And we dealt with this in Genesis chapter twenty seven.
As you look at Genesis chapter twenty seven,
we read about the subtlety of Jacob.
This is with regard to the blessing.
Remember that
the process has come and Isaac is going to give a blessing.
And we see what's taking place.
And the instruction is given to Esau.
Isaac was old. He was dim in his eyes.
He could not see well.
He calls for Esau.
But when he Esau heard or received the instruction,
we understand that Rebecca overheard what was going on.
And Rebecca gave instruction to Jacob.
to go and to prepare and so on and so forth and she was gonna help. I'm gonna
drop down just for sake of time to verse number 35. Notice what the Bible says and
he said, this is Isaac speaking to Esau, and he said, thy brother, that would be
Jacob, came with subtlety and hath taken away thy blessing. And he said, is not he
rightly named Jacob, this is Esau speaking, for he hath supplanted me these
two times, he took away my birthright, and behold now he hath taken away my
blessing. And he said, hast thou not reserved a blessing for me? And Isaac
answered and said unto Esau, behold I have made him thy Lord, and all his
brethren have I given to him for servants, and with corn and wine have I
sustained him, and what shall I do now unto thee my son? And we find that Esau
responds in verse 38, he says unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my
father. Bless me, even me also, my father. And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
Esau was never concerned about spiritual things. He was only ever concerned about
temporal things. And we see that here in Genesis chapter number 27. What is he
pleading for? What is he desiring? He's really desiring a temporal blessing. He
wants to be increased with goods, he wants to benefit with these things, and
he's calling out, he's desiring this blessing, and we find that it's not
going to be given because of the fact that the subtlety of Jacob and the
blessing had been given to Jacob. And we find that the response of Esau is one
of just anger and hatred, and he makes the decision, I'm gonna kill my brother.
Of course that leads to Jacob fleeing to Laban and all that we've
studied over the past several chapters of the book of Genesis. And so we see
that as we look at these passages of Scripture, we're reminded of these three
important events in the life of Esau. And then we come to Genesis chapter number
36. And in Genesis chapter number 36, God is really providing for us the record, as
I said by way of introduction a moment ago, of Esau's family tree. And he's
providing us with this record, and it helps us to understand not only some of
what we just dealt with by way of review from those events in Genesis
chapter number 25 and chapter number 27, but we also see that it will help us
again connect some dots with regard to future events that will take place as we
read through the Old Testament, and we begin to connect all these dots and see
these interactions between these groups of people. So as we get into Genesis
chapter 36, I want you to, if you're taking notes, number one this evening, I
want you to consider with me the decisions of Esau. The decisions of Esau.
We find, first of all, the decision with regard to his wives, and we find in
verses 2 and 3 of Genesis chapter number 36 that the Bible tells us about his
wives that he took. Now, it's very possible, in fact, there's a lot of debate
that goes on with regard to the wives of Esau. There's some discrepancy with
regard to names in a previous chapter with regard to the names of Esau's wife,
and there are a number of theories that exist out there with regard to whether
or not some of the names were adapted in order to not be offensive to Isaac and
what have you. There's also the fact that in this chapter, in Genesis chapter
number 36, it's giving us a picture of the family tree, not necessarily all the
names of his wives. It is very possible they had more than three wives, but it
might be that it's only these three wives that are listed here that gave him
male children, sons, and thus the family tree that is provided. Listen, don't get
mixed up, don't get sideways when someone tries to take something that seems to be
an apparent contradiction and comes to you and says, look, there's a
contradiction here. Listen, God is wiser than us. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God. A preacher of yesteryear said, and I've had it, I want
to say, just ingrained in my brain, and I try to always be reminded myself of this
when people come to me with apparent contradictions, that listen, if you think
there's a mistake, you are mistaken. What do you do? You dig in, you dig deeper, you
try to get along with God. Who gave us the Bible? God. The Holy Spirit is the
author of Scripture, and He lives within you, He lives within me, He is the divine
teacher, and so we seek the face of God. I do not believe there's an apparent
contradiction, or I do not believe there's a contradiction here at all, even though
at surface level somebody could say, look, the names are different and what's going
on, that here God is providing us with the record of the family tree. But I want
you to think about the decisions. We think about his wives that are listed here in
verses 2 and 3 of Genesis chapter number 36, and those names are given to us. I ask
this question when I consider the decisions of Esau. I say this, why did Esau
choose the wives that he did? What was the process in which Esau went through in
order to determine who he would marry? By the way, we of course are not in favor of
polygamy, as we'd see here with multiple wives, but we understand that marriage is
of God, that God saw Adam. He said he's not good that man is left alone. For whoso
findeth a wife, findeth a good thing, and obtain the favor of the Lord. And we find
that God is the one that instituted and designed marriage. Marriage is not man's
idea, it's God's idea. But listen, aside from salvation, who you marry is the most
important decision you're ever going to make in your life. It really is. I married
the wrong person. No, sorry, you got married. It's a tough deal. So how did he
make the decision? Go back with me, Genesis chapter 26. By the way, thanks for asking
the question. Genesis 26, look at verses 34 and 35. We did not touch on Genesis 26
by way of introduction. We looked at chapter 25 and 27, but I want you to notice the Bible
says in verse 34, Esau was 40 years old when he took to wife Judith, the daughter of Barai,
the Hittite, and Beshemoth, the daughter of Elam, the Hittite. Notice what the Bible says
in verse 35, which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah. Huh. Verse 35 is interesting
to me when I think about the decisions of Esau, the decision with regard to who he would
marry. He did not seek the counsel of his parents. You know, the counsel, the Bible
tells us that there's safety in a multitude of counselors, the Bible tells us. And I believe
this evening that we think about the subject of marriage. There's great wisdom in an individual
seeking the counsel of their parents. I've said to our children many times, listen, I
might not be the best dad, but I'm the dad that God gave you. And I want my kids to understand,
I've tried to teach them this over the years, that I'm not perfect. I'm not going to give
perfect counsel, but I'm going to seek God's face and I'm going to pray. And listen, sometimes
as a parent, God sometimes just gives you an uneasiness about something that you might
not even be able to verbalize. God just doesn't give you a piece about it. And we find here
that there's no, as we look at the passage of Scripture, it seems like there's no interest
whatsoever on the part of Esau. Again, remember, he was never concerned about spiritual things,
only concerned about temporal things, that which would please him temporarily. And the
Bible tells us that this was a grief of mind unto Isaac and Rebekah. But there's further
insight that is given to us in chapter 28. Notice, if you will, over in chapter 28, this
is after the blessing is given in Genesis 27. And now, because Esau's ready to kill
Jacob because of the subtlety of Jacob and all that's taken place, now Isaac is going
to send Jacob away, his flight to Paddan Aram, as we mentioned earlier, when he go to Laban.
And we find that Jacob is called into the presence of Isaac. And the Bible tells us
in verse number one that Isaac is going to bless and charge Jacob. And notice what he
says in verse number one. At the end of the verse, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters
of Canaan. Now, is that hard to understand? Very clear. Elementary education level of
comprehension, basic truth. But I want you to see what the Bible says in verse number
eight. And Esau, seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac, his father. How
did he see that? Well, really, he heard the charge that was given from Isaac to Jacob.
Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. So we see that Jacob is receiving
this instruction from his father, Isaac. And Esau, because he has no care, no concern about
what his mom or dad would think. The Bible says that he sees that the daughters of Canaan
pleased not Isaac, his father. Then went Esau unto Ishmael and took unto him a wife, which
he had, Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister of Nebojah, to be
his wife. And we see that he has made these decisions. If you look in chapter number 26,
it speaks about the daughters of Canaan. Specifically, it says that he was 40 years old and he took
the daughter of Bere the Hittite and the Beshemoth, the daughter of Elon the Hittite.
And he takes these wives. We see here that Esau, again, he's making these decisions that
are decisions that are really based on fleshly motives. Not concerned about the spiritual,
not concerned about the eternal, but concerned for the temporal. We find that not only when
we consider with us this evening the decision with regard to his wives, but then we think
about the decision with regard to his dwelling place. And back in Genesis chapter 36, the
Bible tells us...
us in verse 6 and 7. By the way, it's quite interesting as you read verse 6 and 7 with
regard to the expression of Esau in Genesis chapter 27 when he's pleading for a blessing.
You know, God did bless Esau. God blessed Esau. And we find that we were reminded of
that truth when we saw the reunion between Jacob and Esau. Remember, he said, I have
enough. But in verse number 6, the Bible says, And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and
his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all the beasts,
and all the substance which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into the country
from the face of his brother Jacob. For their riches were more than that they might dwell
together in the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
Do you remember another time in Scripture in the book of Genesis when this situation
happened? Yeah. Abraham and Lot, right? And what happened? What was Lot's process for
picking the place where he'd go? It's all his sight. He saw that it was a land that
was pleasing. It was a place that was well watered. A place that would be appropriate
and good for him. And the Bible tells us if you trace the steps of Lot, that initially
he simply pitched his tent towards Sodom. He didn't move into Sodom on day one. He
just pitched his tent towards Sodom. But before long, we see that he's in a place
of leadership within the wicked city of Sodom. You see that progression, right? And Abraham,
listen, Abraham gave him the choice. You pick. And he picked. And then we see Esau, he goes
and he leaves and we see this decision that he makes with regard to his wives, the daughters
of Canaan, as it's mentioned in verse number two of Genesis 36. And then we see the place
where he goes. The place is Mount Seir. And we see that here. It's the south part of the
Dead Sea area there. A place that was well fortified. A place that was extremely complicated
for someone to come in and conquer because of just the land. The way that the land was
set up and all of the caves and all of the structure and what have you. And we find that
with the mountainous region there and that part of the landscape of Israel down there
in Mount Seir, the southern part of the Dead Sea, it was a place that was just natural
protection. And that's where he chooses to go. When we begin to think about these decisions
of Esau, I ask myself this evening and I ask you tonight to consider how is it that we
make decisions? See the reality is that we all make decisions. We make decisions every
single day of our lives. Some decisions that we make are decisions that we don't even really
think about. We just make the decision. We just go through the process and we just made
decisions and we didn't even realize we were making decisions because we're just going
through life and we're doing the things that we're doing. How many of you have ever had
a situation where you said to your spouse, where would you like to go out to eat? And
then there's like this process of time. So I told my family, I'm going to name a restaurant,
I'm going to open a restaurant and I'm going to name it, I don't care. And if everyone
truly goes to the restaurant that they say I don't care to their spouse, I will have
a lot of business. Right? How many times is it a holly? Hey, let's go out to dinner. Where
do you want to go? I don't care. And if I open a second restaurant, it's going to be
called this. It doesn't matter. How many of you get that response? Come on. I know
that somebody more than me gets that response. Right? And here's what I say to my family.
Listen, I make decisions all day long. I don't care where we eat. Can somebody just make
the decision? I say that all the time. I make decisions that are much more complicated than
what I'm going to eat for dinner. It is important. I'm not going to salad works. Amen. And I
don't even think that place exists anymore. But the reality is that we look at this and
we say how is it that we make decisions? What's the process that we go through? Do we seek
the face of God? Do we prayerfully consider that which is before us? Let me ask this.
What are the consequences of your decisions? You know, in a real way, there are decisions
that you make and that I make that we do not know what the consequences of that decision
are going to be. We don't know. We make the decision. How many people make decisions without
even considering the consequences? Maybe we say to somebody when they make a poor decision,
we say what were you thinking? You ever had that thought? You ever had somebody maybe
ask you that? Maybe you've asked yourself that. You made a decision and said that was
not very smart. Self, what were you thinking when you made that decision? Right? We don't
know the consequences. But can I tell you, can I say this this evening that you can rest
assured there will be consequences to your decisions? There will be consequences to your
decisions. Let me ask this. Who is impacted by your decisions? You know, we live in a
midst of a people that are so self-focused that they think they make their decisions
in a vacuum and their decisions only affect them. But those of us that have lived long
enough and have been exposed to enough truth, we know that's just not true. Many people
are affected by the decisions that we make. We make decisions every day. People say this
is my life, I can do what I want to do. No, you're going to make decisions that are going
to affect other people. Sometimes innocent people that don't even know who you are.
But you've affected them. And I would submit to you this evening that the decisions that
are made by Esau, specifically with regard to the wives, when we think about the process
there and how he chose his wives and what he'd seen and what he'd understood, and we
think about what's going on and we say, how are we making the decisions that we're making?
Are we seeking godly counsel? Are we seeking the face of God? I referenced already the
proverb that says there's safety in a multitude of counselors. I heard a preacher say recently,
never make a major ministry decision on Monday, because Sunday might have been a rough day.
And it was kind of comical to hear them say that, but they were being serious. They were
trying to give some advice. And the reality is that when we make the decisions that we
make, listen, sometimes we have some major, major decisions to make in life. And how do
we make them? What are the consequences going to be? Sometimes we can't know all that those
consequences are going to be, but we can rest assured those decisions are going to have
consequences. And we can know this evening that there are people that are going to be
impacted by the decisions that we make. I would say this, as we're reminded of that
struggle within the womb, in Genesis chapter 25, the two natures, the flesh minds fleshly
things. And if we're making decisions, we better make sure that we're not making them
based on fleshly things. It's important that we understand that Esau, Edom, the Edomites,
he was never concerned about spiritual things, temporal, fleshly things. So we notice the
decisions of Esau. I want you to notice with me number two, the descendants of Esau. In
verses four and five, we've read the verses already. In verses four and five, the Bible
gives the record of his sons. It notes here that there are five sons that were born to
Esau, Eliphaz, Reho, Jeus, Jalem, and Korah. His first two wives, according to the text
of scripture, each had one son. The third had three sons, according to verse number
five. We're going to think about these descendants of Esau. We find that in verses 11 through
43, it records for us, again, the portion of scripture that I'm not going to read publicly
this evening for sake of time and all the names that are there, but it records for us
future generations, grandchildren, et cetera. It is of note that we make mention this evening
that verse number 12, notice there in that text of scripture, the Bible says, and Timnah
was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son, and she bared to Eliphaz Amalek. Does that name
ring a bell to you? Does that name connect some dots for you? These were the sons of
Adah, Esau's wife. So, Amalek is the grandson of Esau. As we look here in the text of scripture,
again, begin to trace some of these steps and connect some of the dots that are going
on. We read of the descendants, a number of the names within the text of scripture.
We really don't know anything much about them. We don't know of their descendants and all
of those sorts of things. I made mention of this as we've studied through the book of
Genesis, that you find that God takes the lens of scripture and he's taking the lens
of human history. And we start with Adam and Eve there in Genesis and looking at the creation
and what have you. And then we begin to look at all the children that are born and the
generations and so on and so forth. And then the lens gets smaller and smaller as eventually
it focuses down onto Abraham. And then we see that it focuses onto Isaac. And then we
see that it focuses onto Jacob and to his descendants. And so, though the record is
provided for us and it helps us with identifying some of the peoples that are mentioned and
some of their descendants and what have you, you know that the specifics with regard to
all of these descendants and all that they did are not provided to us within scripture.
because the lens of Scripture is focusing on
the Hebrew race, the Hebrew people,
with regard to the, of course, Messianic line,
and that's where Scripture goes.
And so we find, however, that as we look
at this passage of Scripture,
we see the decisions, we see the descendants,
but then I want you to think of this
as we try to connect some dots this evening, number three.
I want you to note with me the disputes with Edom,
the disputes with Edom.
So begin to think about what's taking place
and try to connect dots with Scripture
and understand here what God is giving us.
I want you to turn to the book of Numbers, if you will,
and I'm gonna provide with you,
it's not an exhaustive list,
it's just a number of examples of disputes
that they have between the children of Israel
and the children of Esau, the Edomites and the Israelites.
Now remember, that struggle within the womb,
there are two nations, right?
It's what the Bible says.
The Bible says the elder shall serve the younger.
We find that God is connecting these dots for us
and helping us to see what's taking place
and we find, yes, the selling of the birthright,
we see the subtlety of Jacob with the blessing.
By the way, I mentioned this when I taught
through that passage of Scripture in Genesis 27,
there was no reason for Jacob to have to scheme.
God had already promised in Genesis chapter number 25
that the elder shall serve the younger.
There's no reason for you in your life
or in my life to scheme, we just trust God.
But here in Numbers chapter number 20,
we find this dispute that is listed here
with the Edomites or the people of Edom,
the descendants of Esau.
Notice, first of all, in Numbers chapter 20,
in the wilderness.
Notice, as the children of Israel had left Egypt,
they've crossed the Red Sea, they're now in the wilderness.
They've already disobeyed God,
according to the evil report
that was brought in Numbers chapter 14
and they said they weren't able,
but we find in verse number 14, here in Numbers 20,
the Bible says that Moses sent messengers from Cadiz
unto the king of Edom.
Thus saith thy brother Israel,
thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us,
how our fathers went down into Egypt
and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time,
and the Egyptians vexed us and our fathers.
And when we cried unto the Lord,
he heard our voice and sent an angel
and hath brought us forth out of Egypt.
And behold, we are in Cadiz,
a city in the outermost of thy border.
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country.
We will not pass through the fields or through the vineyards
neither will we drink of the water of the wells.
We will only go by the king's highway.
We will not turn to the right hand nor to the left
until we have passed thy borders.
Now does the request of verse number 17
sound like a difficult thing?
Were they really causing any trouble
to Edom or the Edomites?
And they just said, can we pass through?
We're not gonna go through your fields,
we're not gonna go through your vineyards,
we're not gonna drink of your water or of your wells.
We're gonna go the king's highway,
we're not gonna turn to the right or to the left.
I mean, we're just gonna pass through your borders.
The Bible says that Edom said unto him,
thou shalt not pass by me
lest I come out against thee with the sword.
It's an interesting response to a simple request, right?
It seems like, damn it,
if you guys wanna pass through, go ahead.
The neighbor back here called and said,
I got some tree work that I have to have done.
It'd be really easy if the tree guys
could come through your property to access my property
because there's really no way for them
to get to where they need to get to through my front yard.
Is it okay?
Sure, they can go through there, not a problem.
I don't think, it's just easy, right?
I don't know if it's a different situation,
but what I'm saying is the response seems odd to the request
but again, when you understand and start connecting
the dots and see what's going on,
the Bible says in verse 19,
and the children of Israel said unto him,
we'll go by the highway,
and if I and my cattle drink of thy water,
then I will pay for it.
I will only, without doing anything else,
go through on my feet.
He said, thou shalt not go through.
And Edom came out against him with much people
and with a strong hand.
Thus, Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border
wherefore Israel turned away from him.
The children of Israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from Kadesh and came unto Mount Hor.
We see this as a first dispute that we really see
of what's going on.
We see that the Bible records for us,
I'm not gonna be able to take the time
to go through all of them,
but the Bible records for us in the times,
the days of King Saul.
There's battle that takes place
with not only the Amalekites,
we saw the grandson, Amalek, of Esau,
but also with the Edomites.
You can read that in 1 Samuel 14.
You can read that in the days of David.
Now, remember with me the history of Israel.
In fact, it tells us,
it's a very interesting statement that is given to us,
you don't need to turn back there,
but in Genesis 36 and verse number 31,
it says, and these are the kings
that reigned in the land of Edom
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
And you read about all those dukes and those chiefs
and what have you there with the Edomites,
and even before the kings of Israel,
they had what was going on there in that land in Seir
with the Edomites,
but then as you begin to think about Israel's history
and Saul being the first king,
well, in the time of Saul,
there's a battle with the Edomites.
There are disputes that takes place
and battles that are recorded.
In the days of David, he's the next king of Israel.
And we find that during his reign in the times of David,
there's disputes that take place.
In fact, the Bible tells us in 2 Samuel 8
and verse number 14, that during his reign,
because David was mighty, the Lord was with him
and the Lord gave him favor,
the Lord preserved him withersoever he went,
the Bible tells us,
but it tells us in 2 Kings 8 and verse 14,
that Edom, that David put garrisons in Edom
and all they of Edom became David's servants.
And again, we see these interactions that are taking place
and all of a sudden we begin to connect these dots
of what's going on in the days of Solomon.
It's a sad thing, but the Bible tells us of Solomon,
we know that he had many wives.
You know, he had some wives that were
the descendants of Edom, Edomites, Moabites,
I mean, others, but Edomites were one of them
that are specifically listed
in 1 Kings 11 and verse number one.
We find that in that text of scripture,
it says, but King Solomon loved many strange women
together with the daughter of Pharaoh,
women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Zidaneans and Hittites.
Again, we see the Edomites referenced.
It's interesting that God tells us
in this same chapter in 1 Kings 11,
it tells us how that God was angry with Solomon, why?
Because of his evil, where he built these places of worship
for these false gods of these wives that he married
and all that was taking place.
And we find that he also was burning incense
and sacrificed one of their gods.
And the Bible then tells us in verse 14 of 1 Kings 11,
and the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon,
hey, dad, the Edomite.
Hey, dad, the Edomite.
He was the king's seed in Edom.
The days of Amaziah, king of Judah,
there's conflict, there are disputes with the Edomites.
But I want you to think about
the judgment upon the Edomites.
I won't take time to look at any of the references.
We're near the end this evening.
But turn to the book of Jeremiah, if you will.
Read two verses from the book of Jeremiah and Ezekiel
and I encourage you to read the small book of Obadiah.
And the book of Obadiah completely deals with Edom,
the sons of Esau.
Specifically goes back to Numbers 20.
To the event that we read of in Numbers 20
where they said we're gonna pass through.
He said, no, you're not.
If you read the book of Obadiah, just a short book,
you'll see that indictment against the Edomites
that God gives through that prophet Obadiah.
But notice in Jeremiah 49,
and then we'll also notice over
in the book of Ezekiel very quickly,
but notice in Jeremiah 49,
really beginning in verse number seven,
it says concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord of hosts.
I'm not gonna read all of it for sake of time.
But we find that these are prophecies
that are given against Edom.
And we see specifically throughout this portion
of the book of Jeremiah,
the number of different places
that are receiving these prophecies
concerning against these particular people groups.
And so concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord of hosts.
And then skip down, if you will, in verse number 17,
the Bible says also Edom shall be a desolation.
Everyone that goeth by it shall be astonished
and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.
The Bible says very similarly in the book of Ezekiel,
look over, if you will, Ezekiel 25.
In Ezekiel 25, in verses 12 through 14,
we read this judgment that is given again
in this portion of the book of Ezekiel,
a number of different nations are being prophesied against.
And in this particular text, it's against Edom.
Beginning in verse number 12,
the Bible says, thus saith the Lord God,
because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah
by taking vengeance and hath greatly offended
and revenged himself upon them.
Therefore, thus saith the Lord God,
I will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom,
will cut off man and beast from it,
and I will make it desolate from Timan,
and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.
And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom
by the hand of my people Israel,
and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger
and according to my fury,
and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord God.
Those are pretty powerful judgments
that are given by Jeremiah and Ezekiel.
Again, you can read the book of Obadiah.
What I wanna think about the application for us this evening
in closing, as we think about this portion of Scripture
and we read about some decisions
and we read about the descendants,
we read about the disputes.
As we think about that, again, that symbolism,
we talked about that struggle within the...
womb, two nations. The elder shall serve the younger. We see that in scripture. We've just
looked at a number of passages of disputes and all that's going on. You find that the
Bible tells us, as I've made application, that not only is it two nations, but by application
we'd see the two natures, the old man and the new man. And we need to think about the
disputes that are recorded for us as we connect the dots historically and look at what's going
on and begin to think about the dispute that we have between the old man and the new man.
We think about trying to walk in the spirit. Turn to the book of Galatians, if you will.
I want you to think about the struggle that we can face as we consider with this evening
in this portion of scripture and think about the struggle that's there even within the
womb in Genesis 25 and then as God provides us with this record. And we come to Galatians
chapter number six and we seek to make this application and we find that the Bible tells
us as we understand being saved, being born again, having the new man, the new nature,
that the old man, the old man is not eradicated. In fact, in the book of Ephesians and the
book of Colossians as well, both of those books go through a portion and Ephesians four
specifically lays out at the whole end of that chapter, put off, put on. The book of
Colossians deals with it the same way. We're to put off the old man and put on the new
and here's what we're to do as we're to walk in this newness of life. But notice in Galatians
five and verse 16, this I say then. It's a wonderful promise of God's word. Walk in the
spirit and you shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. How many of you know that your
flesh still has lusts? Your flesh still has lusts. But the Bible says that if I walk in
the spirit, I shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. It doesn't say that I'm not going
to have a lust of the flesh, so I'm going to be able to have victory. I'm not going
to fulfill the lust of the flesh. Notice in verse 17, for the flesh lusteth against
the spirit and the spirit against the flesh. Notice this, and these are contrary, the one
to the other, so that you cannot do the things that you would. In verses 19 through 21, the
Bible gives us the works of the flesh. In verse 22 and verse 23, the Bible gives us
the fruit of the spirit. If you do a comparison between those two portions of scripture, the
fruit of the spirit is far superior than the works of the flesh. And we ought to have
a spiritually, or we ought to be spiritually minded people, not like Esau having that fleshly,
that carnal, that temporary perspective of life, but that we'd have that perspective
that is seeking to please God. I shared with those that came for the workers meeting tonight
for vacation Bible school a verse of scripture that we're familiar with, but I was reading
it just this past week and God just impressed upon my heart again, this wonderful truth
where Jesus says, for I do always those things that please him in John 8 and verse 29. Esau
wasn't concerned about doing things that please God. He wasn't concerned about doing things
that would please his own father. And this evening, when we understand this struggle
that we face, this two natures that's by way of application, the symbolism of those
two nations that we read of with Jacob and Esau, we find this evening that the struggle,
that they're at enmity one with the other. They're contrary one to the other. So this
evening, what do we do? Well, notice what the Bible says over the book of Colossians.
In Colossians chapter number three, familiar verses of scripture. I hope it will help
us this evening to understand the importance of walking in the spirit and seeking to please
God. The Bible says this, if ye then be risen with Christ. Are we risen with Christ? Spiritually
speaking, if you've been saved, if you've been born again, you're risen with Christ.
Notice what it says, seek those things which are above. Where Christ sitteth on the right
hand of God. Notice what it says, set your affection on things above, not on things of
the earth. Why? For you're dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ,
who is our life, praise the Lord for that little statement, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Mortify therefore your members which are upon
the earth. And he goes through, and this is the section of the book of Colossians that
deals with that put off and put on portion of scripture. We make decisions in life, and
it's the first point that we dealt with this evening. How do we make the decisions? Just
go along with something because it's what somebody else is doing, it's something that's
popular, it's something that's accepted. Or we sit back and say, you know, is this going
to please God? What's the impact of this decision? What are the consequences of this decision?
Is this decision that is before me really a decision that's going to be able to be made
in a vacuum that's only going to affect me, that's only going to impact me? So as we look
at the genealogy, really the descendants, the generations of Esau, in Genesis chapter
36, God helps us to connect some dots in scripture. God helps us to be able to see some of the
historical content of preceding events in the life of Esau and then future interactions
between the Edomites and the Israelites, the Amalekites. But this evening as we think about
our own lives and try to make spiritual application, I'm going to focus on those few first thoughts
with regard to our decisions. I hope this evening that we seek counsel, godly counsel.
I hope this evening that we seek the face of God in the decisions that we're making.
You say, well, listen, I'm older, it's not really that big of a deal. No, it is. It is.
There are people watching you, your children, your grandchildren, if God has given them
to you. If not, children in our church, those that were to be an example to you. Think about
the admonition that's given in God's Word to those that are referred to as being the
aged women and the aged men in church. Listen, there is a real biblical role that God gives
in the epistles for aged women and aged men in a church to be able to influence and impact
a future generation. And by the way, it's a role that is very rarely spoken about today,
but it's so vital and it's so important. This evening, you have decisions, I have decisions.
Are we trying to please ourselves like Esau did? What works best for me? We're going to
take a piece of paper, we're going to lay it out and say, well, here's all the pros
and here's all the cons. How many of you have heard somebody say that about making a decision?
You know, that's not how we as Bible believers make decisions. Why? Because if God said to
do something, it doesn't matter how many pros or cons there are. We do what God says. It
doesn't matter how many people understand it. It doesn't matter how popular it might
be. It doesn't matter what anyone else is doing. We say God has led and God has made
it clear and this is the decision I have to make. Decisions have consequences. You can,
in a certain sense, control your decisions, but not your consequences. How many times
we face the consequences and we don't like them? We say, man, I wish I could have. The
consequences are already in motion. It's already taken place. This evening, we see the generations
of Esau. We can see the biblical, historical understanding of God giving us all of that
information. Tonight, I hope that we can make a spiritual application. Say, God, help me
to not be concerned about the temporal things, the fleshly things. Help me to be spiritually
minded. Help me to please you with my life. Let's pray. Father, we love you. We thank
you for loving us. We thank you for your word, the truth that's contained therein. God, I
pray that as we've looked at this portion of Scripture and a number of other verses
this evening, you help us to make application in our lives. Help us, Lord, to please you.
Understand that we have decisions in our lives. Some decisions that are much more significant
than other decisions, decisions that will have consequences that will impact others.
Lord, I pray that you would help us to seek your face, would seek godly counsel, that
we would walk in the Spirit, that our aim and desire would be most important to please
you. I pray that as we have opportunity to respond this evening, have a moment of invitation,
I pray that you'd move and work, guide us, and direct us, Lord. Help us to move and work.
to be doers of the Word and not hearers only. Maybe somebody has some major decisions in
front of them. God, would you give them wisdom? Would you give them leadership? Would you
help them to seek your face? Would you help them to please you? I pray that you have your
will and way, for it's in Christ's name we pray.